XUNSCROLLZOOM
==============

by Kevin Pulo, kev@pulo.com.au
https://github.com/devkev/xunscrollzoom/
Copyright (c) 2019
Licensed under the GNU GPL v2 or higher, as per the COPYING file.


SUMMARY
-------

In X11 programs, ignore when the Ctrl key is held down while scrolling with the
pointing device.


DESCRIPTION
-----------

In many graphical programs (including some terminal emulators), holding down
the control key while scrolling the mouse wheel controls the zoom level.

However, the implementation of this in X11 programs/frameworks is, at best,
abysmal, because there is no proper link between the widget being zoomed and
the keyboard/mouse events controlling the zoom (or even between the keyboard
and mouse events themselves).

For example, with the inertial scrolling found on many touchpads, it is
possible to "fling" the scroll so that it continues long after the gesture has
ended, and/or long after it has finished having any effect (eg. the view has
hit the top/bottom and can scroll no further in the desired direction).  If
during this time the user depresses the control key, for example to activate
some unrelated keyboard shortcut/command, then the system will apply the
control modifier to the scroll events, causing unintended zooming.  This
behaviour is an anathema to me, and I eventually decided to stop putting up
with it.

The solution implemented here is to completely disable ctrl-scroll actions in
programs started with this utility.  Since I almost never intentionally use the
ctrl-scroll action, and most programs include an alternate mechanism for
zooming (eg. ctrl-plus/minus), this suits me just fine.

The utility works by injecting an $LD_PRELOAD library into launched programs.
This intercepts the input events returned by X11 (and the Xi/Xi2 Xinput
frameworks) and clears the Control modifier bit on scroll events, leaving them
as regular scroll events (as if the Ctrl key wasn't pressed).

It works quite nicely on most of the programs I routinely use, including:

- Firefox
- Chrome
- Terminology
- Gimp
- Libreoffice
- Audacity
- Inkscape


INSTALLATION
------------

Standard autoconf process:  ./configure && make && make install


USAGE
-----

    xunscrollzoom [options] <program> [args...]

Valid options are:

    -v, --version   Display the xunscrollzoom version
    -h, --help      Display this help
    -d, --debug     Display debug info

    --single        Affect only the specified program, and not any
                    other subsequently forked processes


LIMITATIONS
-----------

- Only dynamically linked binaries.

- SELinux/Apparmor can get in the way, denying permission to map the dynamic
  library (necessary to load it) and giving an error message like:
    ```
    ERROR: ld.so: object '/usr/local/lib/libxunscrollzoom.so' from LD_PRELOAD cannot be preloaded (failed to map segment from shared object): ignored.
    ```


FEEDBACK
--------

Comments, feature suggestions, bug reports, patches, etc are most
welcome, please send them to Kevin Pulo <kev@pulo.com.au>.

